title=background&text=Redevelopment of Los Arcos Mall has been in the works since 1984, when the Scottsdale City Council first began studying ways to revitalize the shopping center, located on the southeast corner of Scottsdale Road and McDowell Drive.

The city in 1997 selected developer Steve Ellman to head up redevelopment of the Los Arcos district into a $550 million sports and entertainment complex. After 11 months, Ellman on Feb. 1 finally completed his $125 million purchase of the Phoenix Coyotes, who will anchor the new complex with their own sports arena.

Projected to lose as much ast $20 million this season, the Phoenix Coyotes are eager to move from America West Arena, which they share with the NBA Phoenix Suns and the WNBA Phoenix Mercury. Most of the Coyotes' losses are credited to their lease situation: The Coyotes pay $25,000 per game for use of the facility and are not allowed a share of concession revenues. Their lease at AWA expired January 15, and an automatic five-year renewal has kicked in.

On September 25, Ellman announced that he expects the sale to be finalized on or around October 15, two weeks after the start of the NHL hockey season. In June, Hockey great Wayne Gretzky signed on with Ellman as part-owner and director of hockey operations for the team.

Voters in Scottsdale, Fountain Hills and Guadalupe approved spending public funds to help build the complex in November 1999. Ellman and the Coyotes will be allowed to keep 50 percent of sales tax revenues generated at Los Arcos over the next 10 years.

However, the development will not receive any public funding if the Coyotes sale and stadium plans are not finalized by March 1, the new expiration date of the stadium district. (The City of Scottsdale granted Ellman extension from the original Dec. 31 date.)

Ellman and the Coyotes are putting up about $134 million and will borrow another $401 million to build the new Los Arcos complex. The public cost of the project will be about $352 million, to be recouped through sales tax revenue when the complex opens.

Ellman plans to sell the complex in 2013 for a profit of $225 million, according to documents released by his company to the City of Scottsdale in September 2000.

Scottsdale is battling Ellman for access to his company's financial records to verify that he has sufficient backing to start the project. Ellman has so far resisted offering a full financial disclosure, and has hinted that he is looking at alternative sites, including some of the runners-up for the new Cardinals stadium. Ellman has not ruled out selling the team if he doesn't get an acceptable arena deal in the Valley, or if the team doesn't stop losing money.

In the meantime, with negotiations with Scottsdale still underway, Ellman said on Feb. 15 that the Los Arcos arena can be open in 20 months if the city grants him the permit to start construction.


Sources: The Arizona Republic and the Associated Press.
