countryname=israel
&countryinfo=Following World War II, the British withdrew from Palestine and the UN partitioned the area into Arab and Jewish states, an arrangement rejected by the Arabs. Later, the Israelis defeated the Arabs in a series of wars, deepening tensions between both sides. Negotiations are underway between Israel and Palestinian representatives (from the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip) and Israel and Syria to achieve a permanent settlement. Tensions between Israel and Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon have been eased through treaties and Israeli withdrawals from seized territories.

source: CIA World Factbook 2000
&timeline=1517
The Ottoman Empire dominates the Middle East region.

1820
Part of the Zionist movement, Jews begin migrating to Palestine.

1917
In the Balfour Declaration, the UK announces its support for a Jewish homeland.

1918
Turkey's Ottoman Empire is broken up after World War II, and the divided region is ruled by the UK or France.

1923
The UK assumes control of the Palestine/Israel territory under a League of Nations mandate.

1945
Widespread knowledge of the Holocaust boosts worldwide support for the creation of a Jewish state.

Nov. 29, 1947
The UN approves a joint US/Soviet plan to divide Israel into Arab and Jewish states.

1948
Jordan controls much of the West Bank, including Jerusalem, until 1967.

May. 14, 1948
The UK withdraws from Palestine, and Israel officially becomes an independent state. Hordes of Jewish refugees flood into the region.

May. 15, 1948
Forces from neigboring Arab countries invade Israel.

Jan. 7, 1949
Cease-fire declared in the Middle East. By this time, Israel had grown 50% in size by seizing parts of western Galilee, the West Bank and Jerusalem.

1950
Israel declares Jerusalem its capital, but the US maintains its embassy presence in Tel Aviv.

1951
Egypt breaks its treaties with the UK, leading to mass rioting and attacks on UK soldiers in the Suez Canal.

1956
The US and UK withdraw their financial support for Egypt's Aswan High Dam. In response, Egypt seizes the Suez Canal, expels British officials and bars Israeli shipping.

Oct. 31, 1956
Israeli forces, with UK and French aid, seize the Gaza Strip and take control of the Sinai peninsula and the Suez Canal, later withdrawing only under pressure from the US and UN.

1964
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) is established.

Jun. 5, 1967
In the Arab-Israeli War (also called the "Six-Day War"), Israel seizes the Golan Heights from Syria, the Sinai peninsula from Egypt and the West Bank from Jordan. The UN declares a cease-fire on June 10.

Apr. 1969
Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser declares the UN cease-fire void along the Suez Canal and continues battles with the Israelis over the Sinai peninsula.

Jun. 9, 1970
In a US-negotiated peace deal, Egypt recognizes Israel's existence within certain territorial boundaries and Israel agrees to withdraw from occupied territories. The two countries also agree to a 3-month cease-fire.

Oct. 6, 1973
Israel beats back a surprise attack from its Arab neighbors on Yom Kippur. Egypt tries to retake the Sinai peninsula, while Syria tries for the Golan Heights. Arab states impose an oil embargo on the West.

Oct. 22, 1973
Israel and its Arab adversaries accept a UN truce.

Jan. 1974
US Secretary of State Kissenger brokers a peace deal between Israel and its Arab neighbors in which Egypt was granted part of the Sinai peninsula along the Suez Canal.

Nov. 20, 1977
Egypt's president Anwar el-Sadat visits Jeruaslem and asks the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, for a permanent peace settlement. The Arab world is furious with Egypt for the move.

1978
Israel invades Lebanon.

Mar. 26, 1979
Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty provides for Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai peninsula, Egypt's recognition of Israel's existence.

Aug. 1980
Egypt halts further talks with Israel because of Israel's continued settlement in the West Bank.

Apr. 25, 1982
Israel withdraws from the Sinai peninsula, per the 1979 Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty.

Jun. 9, 1982
Israeli troops invade southern Lebanon and Beirut, home of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), in response to an assassination attempt on the Israeli ambassador in London. Relations between Israel and neighboring countries worsen.

May. 17, 1983
Lebanon and Israel sign a US-brokered peace deal, calling for Israel's withdrawal from the country. Israel withdraws from Beirut, but keeps troops in southern Lebanon.

Sept. 14, 1983
Lebanese president-elect Bashir Gemayel is killed by a bomb that destroyed his party headquarters. The following day, Israeli soldiers invade west Beirut. The parliament of Lebanon elected Gemayel's brother Amin Gemayal president on Sept. 20.

Sept. 16, 1983
Christian militiamen linked to Israel begin a 3-day massacre of 1,800 men, women and children in Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon. An Israeli commission held then-Defense Minister (now Prime Minister) Ariel Sharon "indirectly responsible" for the massacre. Recently, survivors have filed suit in international court, arguing that Sharon's culpability is much greater, and that he should be tried by in international tribunal for crimes against humanity.

Sept. 17, 1983
UN peacekeepers return to Lebanon after the Palestinian massacre is discovered.

Nov. 8, 1985
American Jew Leon Klinghoffer is killed by Palestinian militants who had seized the Italian cruise liner Achille Lauro.

1987
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and West Bank declare an Intifadeh, beginning a long period of riots and violence in the region.

1989
PLO leader Yasser Arafat reverses decades of previous PLO practice by acknowledging Israel's right to exist and suggesting a willingness to negotiate for peace.

1992
Yitzhak Rabin becomes Israeli prime minister and halts Israeli settlement in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, a contentious issue with the Palestinians.

Sept. 13, 1993
The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles is signed in Washington, providing for a transitional period of Palestinian self-government in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Granting of permanent Palestinian government was to be decided through direct negotiations, which resumed in Sept. 1999.

May 1994
The Palestinian Authority assumes control of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Regional economic prosperity plummets over the next five years largely because of restrictive Israeli border policies.

Oct. 26, 1994
Territorial disputes between Israel and Jordan are resolved by the Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace.

Nov. 4, 1995
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin assassinated by a Jewish extremist. He is succeeded by Shimon Peres.

May 1996
Benjamin Netanyahu is narrowly elected Israel's prime minister. With a more hard-line view, he objects to much of the DOP agreement, arguing that the Palestinians were granted too many concessions.

Jan. 1997
Israeli and Palestinian authorities sign the Hebron accord, calling for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. However, the Israeli government angers the Palestinians by allowing the construction of more Jewish settlements in the West Bank, ostensibly to accomodate an influx of refugees from Russia. Later in the year, Hamas militants kill more than 20 Israeli civilians in suicide bombings.

Oct. 1998
Israel/PLO negotiations resume regarding permanent Palestinian self-government in the Gaza Strip and West Bank. Although the two parties reach an agreement, the peace accord quickly begins to unravel.

May. 1999
Israeli elections are held, and Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon becomes a dominating issue in the campaign. Ehud Barak unseats Netanyahu and becomes Israel's new prime minister.

Jun. 1999
Israel bombs southern Lebanon.

Sept. 1999
Israel/PLO negotiations resume regarding permanent Palestinian self-government.

Dec. 1999
Israel and Syria resume talks, but the negotiations break down the following month when Syria demands the complete return of the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights.

Feb. 2000
Hezbollah forces attack Israeli targets, leading to Israeli retaliatory strikes.

May. 24, 2000
Israel fully withdraws from Lebanon after a 22-year occupation.

Sept. 2000
High tensions and a visit by hardline opposition leader Ariel Sharon to a holy site leads to some of the worst violence in years for the region. Nearly 400 people, mostly Palestinians, are killed.

Feb. 2001
Ariel Sharon handily defeats Barak in Israeli prime minister elections. Sharon, known for his hardline stances, military history and only cursory interest in the peace process, is greeted with muted enthusiasm from the West and outrage from the Arab states.
