timeline=1517
The Ottoman Empire dominates the Middle East region.

1745
Muhammed ibn'Abd al-Wahhab and his Wahhabi movement begin a holy war aimed at unifying the Arabian peninsula and "purifying" the region of other Islamic sects.

1798-1801
Napoleon's forces occupy Egypt.

1818
The Ottomans and their Egyptian allies drive the Wahhabis out of the Arabian peninsula.

1820
Jews begin migrating to Palestine as part of a Zionist movement.

1853
During the 1800s, Great Britain grants local autonomy to the nine Trucial States of the Persian Gulf (later, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain).

1857
Great Britain takes control of the Indian subcontinent, including Pakistan.

1869
The Suez Canal is completed, linking the Mediterranean Sea with the Red Sea. France and Great Britain begin to take more interest in the region.

1882
Great Britain begins an occupation of Egypt, despite the Ottoman Empire's sovereignty over the region.

1893
Britain grants Afghanistan autonomy and establishes the so-called "Durand Line" as a border with British India (present-day Pakistan).

1902
Abdul al-Aziz Ibn Saud captures Riyadh and sets out on a 30-year campaign to unify the Arabian peninsula.

1906
Resenting the political, economic and social advantages held by British India's Hindu population, the region's Muslims form the nationalist Muslim League to represent their interests. The League supported Britain in WWII when India's leaders would not, leading to Britain's approval of a separate Muslim state in 1947.

1914
Egypt becomes a UK protectorate.

1917
In the Balfour Declaration, Great Britain announces its support for a Jewish homeland.

1918
Turkey's Ottoman Empire is broken up after World War II, and the divided region is ruled by Great Britain or France. In November, North Yemen is granted its independence.

1919
Great Britain grants Afghanistan full independence.

1920
After occupying the region during WWI, Great Britain is given a League of Nations mandate over Mesopotamia, which includes Iraq. Meanwhile, France divides its territory in the region into two separate colonies -- Syria and Lebanon.

1921
Reza Kahn takes power over Persia (now Iran) in a coup.

Feb. 28, 1922
Egypt gains its independence from Great Britain, but Great Britain reserves the right to provide military defense for the Suez Canal and Egypt.

1923
Great Britain assumes control of the Palestine/Israel territory under a League of Nations mandate.

1925
Reza Kahn declares himself shah of Persia (now Iran) and changes his name to Reza Shah Pahlavi. He works to elminate foreign claims to Persian territories.

1926
Emir Amanullah founds an Afghan monarchy.

Mar. 10, 1932
Iraq gains its independence from Great Britain.

Sept. 23, 1932
The states of Nejd and Hejaz are unified to form the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The new country is governed by an absolute monarchy, ruled by Islamic law.

1935
The country of Persia renames itself Iran.

1936
Oil discovered in Saudia Arabia, increasing the Middle East's worldwide importance. Commercial oil production begins during WWII. Meanwhile, under a treaty between Great Britain and Egypt, Great Britain withdraws its troops in Egypt from all but the Suez Canal.

1941
Iran's support of Axis powers during WWII lead to its invasion by Anglo-Russian forces, who depose Reza Shah Pahlavi in favor of his more Western-thinking son, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi.

Nov. 26, 1941
Lebanon declares its independence from France, but is only granted its freedom in stages.

Nov. 22, 1943
Lebanon gains its full independence from France.

1945
Widespread knowledge of the Holocaust boosts worldwide support for the creation of a Jewish state.

1946
Syria and Jordan gain their independence from France and Great Britain, respectively. Meanwhile, French troops withdraw from Lebanon, effectively granting the country its full independence.

Aug. 1947
British India is freed from British rule and partitioned along religious lines into Pakistan (Muslim) and India (Hindu). With unrest brewing between the two countries, 17 million people flee across the borders in both directions. Possession of the Kashmir region in northern India remains a hotly contested issue between the two countries, leading to wars in 1949, 1965, 1971 and 1999.

Nov. 29, 1947
The UN approves a joint US/Soviet plan to divide Israel into Arab and Jewish states.

May 14, 1948
Israel officially becomes an independent state after Great Britain withdraws from the former Palestine. Hordes of Jewish refugees, many of them displaced by World War II, flood into the former Palestine. The following day, forces from neighboring Arab countries -- including Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Iraq -- invade Israel, beginning the first Israeli-Arab War. At this time, Jordan controls much of the West Bank, including Jerusalem.

Jan. 7, 1949
A cease-fire is finally declared in the Middle East between Israel and its Arab neighbors. Since the start of hostilities, Israel had grown 50 percent in size by seizing parts of western Galilee, the West Bank and Jerusalem.

1950
Israel declares Jerusalem, in the West Bank, its capital, but the United States and most other countries maintain their embassy presence in Tel Aviv.

1951
Egypt breaks its treaties with Great Britain, leading to mass rioting and attacks on British soldiers stationed at the Suez Canal.

Jul. 23, 1952
Gen. Mohammed Naguib leads a military coup of the Egyptian government, deposing the monarchy.

Jun. 18, 1953
The monarchy is formally abolished in Egypt, and the country is set up as a republic.

1956
The United States and Great Britain withdraw their financial support for Egypt's Aswan High Dam. In response, Egypt seizes the Suez Canal, expels British officials and bars Israeli shipping. On October 31, Israeli forces, with British and French aid, seize the Gaza Strip and take control of the Sinai peninsula and the Suez Canal, later withdrawing only under pressure from the United States and United Nations.

Mar. 23, 1956
Pakistan becomes a republic, under military rule.

1958
A civil war breaks out in Lebanon between Muslim factions and the pro-West government. US soldiers are sent to restore the peace on July 15.

Jul. 1958
Members of Iraqi royalty, including King Faisal II and Crown Prince Abdul-Illah are assassinated in a military coup. The monarchy is deposed, and Iraq is declared a republic. The country is headed by a military junta led by Abdul Karem Kassim, who begins to reverse the previous administration's more pro-Western policies.

Jun. 19, 1961
Kuwait gains its independence from Great Britain.

1962
A pro-Egyptian military coup unseats the ruling family of North Yemen, leading to a civil war in which Egypt and the USSR supported the revolutionaries and Saudi Arabia and Jordan supported the royalists.

Mar. 1963
Syria falls under military rule.

Mar. 8, 1963
Abdul Karem Kassim, head of Iraq's junta, is assassinated in a military coup staged by the socialist Ba'ath Party. In November, Abdel Salam Arif, part of the 1958 coup, stages another coup and ousts the Ba'aths from Iraq.

1964
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) is established.

Jun. 5, 1967
In the Arab-Israeli War (also called the "Six-Day War"), Israel seizes the Golan Heights from Syria, the Sinai peninsula from Egypt and the West Bank from Jordan. The UN declares a cease-fire on June 10.

Nov. 30, 1967
After battling local revolutionaries for most of the 1960s, Great Britain withdraws from South Yemen.

Jul. 1968
Maj. Gen. Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, a member of the Ba'ath Party (which staged the March 1963 coup), leads another military coup in Iraq. His second-in-command is Saddam Hussein.

1969
The civil war in North Yemen ends in victory for the military revolutionaries.

Apr. 1969
Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser declares the United Nations-imposed cease-fire void along the Suez Canal and resumes fighting with Israel over the Sinai peninsula.

1970
South Yemen goes Marxist, leading to the mass exodus of hundreds of thousands of South Yemenis to the north and contributing to decades of hostility between North and South Yemen.

Jun. 9, 1970
In a US-negotiated peace deal, Egypt recognizes Israel's existence within certain territorial boundaries and Israel agrees to withdraw from occupied territories. The two countries also agree to a 3-month cease-fire. Shortly after the end of that cease-fire, on September 28, Egyptian president Nasser dies of a heart attack. Anwar el-Sadat becomes Egypt's next president.

Mar. 26, 1971
Bangladesh, formerly East Pakistan, declares its independence from Pakistan, starting a civil war with Pakistan and incurring Indian intervention. On Dec. 16, Pakistan concedes defeat, and the president of Pakistan steps down. The new Pakistani head of state, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, formally recognizes Bangladesh's independence.

Dec. 2, 1971
Six Trucial States (Abu Zaby, 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah, Dubayy and Umm al Qaywayn) merge to form the United Arab Emirates. The three other Trucials -- Qatar, Bahrain and Ra's al Khaymah -- do not join.

Jul. 17,1973
In Afghanistan, King Mohammed Zahir Shah is ousted by his cousin, Mohammed Daoud Khan. The deposed king is exiled to Rome, where he remains today.

Oct. 6, 1973
Israel beats back a surprise attack from its Arab neighbors on Yom Kippur. Egypt tries to retake the Sinai peninsula, while Syria tries for the Golan Heights. Arab states impose an oil embargo on the West. Sixteen days later, on October 22, Israel and its Arab adversaries accept a UN truce.

Jan. 1974
US Secretary of State Kissenger brokers a peace deal between Israel and its Arab neighbors in which Egypt is granted part of the Sinai peninsula along the Suez Canal.

1975
Saudi Arabia king Faisal is assassinated by a relative. Faisal's brother, Prince Khalid, assumes control.

Mar. 1975
Lebanon's 16-year civil war begins.

Jun. 5, 1975
The Suez Canal is cleared and reopened.

Oct. 1976
Syria begins occupation of Lebanon for peacekeeping purposes, ending large-scale fighting in the country.

1977
Pakistan's first civillian elections are held in March, but the results, and overwhelming victory for President Bhutto's People's Pakistani Party, are denounced as fraudulent. On July 5, Gen. Mohammed Zia ul-Haq leads a military takeover of Pakistan's government.

Nov. 20, 1977
Infuriating the rest of the Arab world, Egyptian president Anwar el-Sadat visits Jeruaslem and asks the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, for a permanent peace settlement.

1978
Israel invades Lebanon.

May 1978
First communist coup in Afghanistan. Noor Taraki tries to establish a Marxist state.

Sept. 1978
Responding to escalating demonstrations against his Westernization efforts in Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi imposes martial law.

Sept. 16, 1978
Gen. Mohammed Zia ul-Haq declares himself president of Pakistan.

Jan. 16, 1979
Mohammed Reza Pahlavi and his family are exiled from Iran, and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returns from exile to take control. On April 1, Iran becomes an Islamic republic, and Khomeini begins a campaign to eradicate Western influence.

Mar. 26, 1979
The Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty is signed, providing for Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai peninsula and Egypt's recognition of Israel's existence.

Apr. 4, 1979
Deposed Pakistani president Bhutto is executed, setting off riots by his supporters.

Jul. 16, 1979
Saddam Hussein becomes president of Iraq.

Nov. 4, 1979
Islamic students storm the US Embassy in Tehran, Iran, holding 52 Americans hostage for 444 days (until 1/20/81). Iranian ruler Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini defies a UN vote and US sanctions (including an economic boycott, a cutoff in diplomatic relations and the deportation of Iranian students in the US) in refusing to release the hostages. Khomeini's demands include a US guarantee not to interfere in Iranian affairs, an unfreezing of Iranian assets and an apology.

Dec. 1979
Answering the calls for help from the crumbling Afghan Marxist government, the Soviet Army invades and occupies Afghanistan. Militant Islamic and anti-communist mujahidin forces declare a holy war against the Soviet forces and are supplied and trained by the US, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and others.

1980s
Cheating by OPEC members, more competition from nonmembers and worldwide conservation efforts lead to lower oil prices, providing a serious economic blow for Middle Eastern oil-producing nations.

Aug. 1980
Egypt halts further talks with Israel because of Israel's continued settlement in the West Bank.

Sept. 20, 1980
A bloody, indecisive 8-year war between Iran and Iraq begins over a territorial dispute. Fearful of Iran's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Saudi Arabia and many of the smaller oil-producing Middle Eastern countries quietly make financial contributions to Iraq.

Jan. 20, 1981
American hostages at the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran, are released hours after Ronald Reagan is sworn in as US president.

Oct. 6, 1981
Egyptian president Anwar el-Sadat is assassinated by Muslim extremists.

Apr. 25, 1982
Israel withdraws from the Sinai peninsula, per the 1979 Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty.

Jun. 9, 1982
Israeli troops invade southern Lebanon and Beirut, home of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), in response to an assassination attempt on the Israeli ambassador in London. Relations between Israel and neighboring countries worsen.

Apr. 18, 1983
A suicide car-bomber blows up the US Embassy in Beirut, killing 17 Americans.

May 17, 1983
Lebanon and Israel sign a US-brokered peace deal, calling for Israel's withdrawal from the country. Israel withdraws from Beirut, but keeps troops in southern Lebanon.

Sept. 14, 1983
Lebanese president-elect Bashir Gemayel is killed by a bomb that destroyed his party headquarters. The following day, Israeli soldiers invade west Beirut. The parliament of Lebanon elected Gemayel's brother Amin Gemayal president on Sept. 20.

Sept. 16, 1983
Christian militiamen linked to Israel begin a 3-day massacre of 1,800 men, women and children in Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon. An Israeli commission held then-Defense Minister (now Prime Minister) Ariel Sharon "indirectly responsible" for the massacre. Recently, survivors have filed suit in international court, arguing that Sharon's culpability is much greater, and that he should be tried by in international tribunal for crimes against humanity.

Sept. 17, 1983
UN peacekeepers return to Lebanon after the Palestinian massacre is discovered.

Oct. 23, 1983
Shiite suicide bombers blow up the French military headquarters and a US Marine barracks in Beirut, killing 241 Marines and 58 French paratroopers.

Dec. 12, 1983
Shiite extremists set off car bombs in front of the US and French embassies in Kuwait City, killing 5 people and wounding 86.

1984
UN international peacekeeping forces are withdrawn from Lebanon. On Sept. 20, a car bomb at the U.S. Embassy annex in Lebanon kills 16 and injures the ambassador.

May 14, 1985
Shiite Muslim gunmen divert a TWA Boeing 727 to Beirut. They demand the release of 700 Arabs held by Israel. A US Navy diver is killed and 39 Americans are held. They are released after Syrian mediation.

Nov. 8, 1985
Palestinian militants seize the Italian cruise liner Achille Lauro and kill American Jew Leon Klinghoffer.

Dec. 30, 1985
Martial law under Gen. Mohammed Zia ul-Haq ends in Pakistan, and a limited representative form of government is restored.

Sept. 5, 1986
Hijackers seize a Pan Am jumbo jet carrying 358 people at the Karachi airport in Pakistan. 20 people are killed when security forces storm the plane.

1987
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and West Bank declare an Intifadeh, beginning a long period of riots and violence in the region.

Feb. 1987
Syrian peacekeepers step out of their roles as observers in Beirut, Lebanon, and intervene in fighting between two Muslim sects.

Apr. 1988
The Soviet Union, United States, Afghanistan and Pakistan sign accords calling from an end to outside interference in the warring Afghan factions.

Aug. 19, 1988
Pakistani head of state Mohammed Zia ul-Haq dies when the Pakistani Air Force plane he was flying in exploded in mid-air. Benazir Bhutto, daughter of former president Zulfikar Bhutto, is later elected prime minister.

Aug. 20, 1988
Iran and Iraq's bloody 8-year war ends in a stalemate with a United Nations-brokered peace deal.

Dec. 21, 1988
A Pan Am Boeing 747 explodes over Lockerbie, Scotland, on a flight from London to New York, killing 270 people, including residents of the town.

1989
PLO leader Yasser Arafat reverses decades of previous PLO practice by acknowledging Israel's right to exist and suggesting a willingness to negotiate for peace.

Feb. 15, 1989
The Soviet Union withdraws from Afgnanistan. Official figures estimate 15,000 Soviet soldiers died during the 10-year occupation, but independent analysts place that number closer to 50,000. The pro-Soviet government of President Najibullah was left in control of Afghanistan. Meanwhile, the U.S. Embassy in Kabul closes due to security concerns.

Jun. 1989
Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini dies, and Ayotolla Kahmenei takes power as supreme leader.

1990
Iran and Iraq restore diplomatic relations. Meanwhile, Iraq accuses Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates of overproducing oil. On Aug. 2, Iraq invades Kuwait over border demarcation and oil drilling disputes.

May 22, 1990
North and South Yemen are unified as the Republic of Yemen.

1991
Lebanon's 16-year civil war ends.

Jan.-Feb. 1991
On January 8, the United States leads an international coalition to expel Iraq from Kuwait in the Persian Gulf War. Iraq fires missiles on Israel during the conflict, but Israel does not retaliate. On February 23, the United States launches a ground war against Iraq. Fighting ends four days later, on February 27, with Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait. The UN imposes heavy sanctions on Iraq, and the US maintains a heavy military presence in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf.

1992
The Sa'ud family, the ruling monarchy of Saudi Arabia, introduces the country's first constitution.

Apr. 1992
The Afghanistan civil war begins when mujahidin rebels (most of them freedom fighters from the war against the Soviet Union), seize power, sparking years of fighting among various factions for control. By the time the war ends in 1996, 1 million lives have been lost.

Jan. 1993
The Pentagon withdraws its American military personnel from Yemen.

Feb. 26, 1993
A bomb explodes in a parking garage below the World Trade Center in New York, killing six people and wounding more than 1,000. Six Islamic militants with suspected ties to Osama bin Laden are later convicted.

Sept. 13, 1993
The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles is signed in Washington, providing for a transitional period of Palestinian self-government in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Granting of permanent Palestinian government was to be decided through direct negotiations, which resumed in September 1999. Earlier in the year, Yitzhak Rabin had been elected as Israel's prime minister and halted Israeli settlement in the Gaza Strip and West Bank.

1994
Osama bin Laden's Saudi Arabian citizenship is revoked. At this time, bin Laden is living in Sudan.
Disputes between the north and south lead to a brief civil war in Yemen.
The Taliban Religious Army is founded in Afghanistan.

May 1994
The Palestinian Authority assumes control of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Regional economic prosperity plummets over the next five years largely because of restrictive Israeli border policies.

Oct. 26, 1994
Territorial disputes between Israel and Jordan are resolved by the Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace.

Nov. 1994
Iraq formally accepts a UN-demarcated border with Kuwait.

Apr. 19, 1995
A bomb rips through the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, killing 168 and wounding more than 500. While Islamic extremists are initially suspected, American Timothy McVeigh is convicted and executed for the attack.

Nov. 4, 1995
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is assassinated by a Jewish extremist. He is succeeded by Shimon Peres (now Israel's foreign minister).

Nov. 13, 1995
A car bomb detonates at a US military headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, killing five Americans.

1996
The Taliban overthrows the Afghan government on September 27, but the country remains in flux, with various factions still fighting for control. By the end of the fall, the Afghan civil war has mostly ended, with the Taliban controlling some 90 percent of the country. Today, only one country, Pakistan, recognizes the Taliban as the legitimate Afghan governing body. Meanwhile, Sudan, under international pressure, asks Osama bin Laden to leave the country. Bin Laden takes up refuge in Afghanistan.

May 1996
Benjamin Netanyahu is narrowly elected Israel's prime minister. With a more hard-line view, he objects to much of the DOP agreement signed by Yitzhak Rabin, arguing that the Palestinians were granted too many concessions.

Jun. 25, 1996
A truck bomb explodes outside the Khobar towers in Dharan, Saudi Arabia, killing 19 American servicemen. Members of the Hezbollah were indicted for the attack.

Dec. 1996
The UN implements an oil-for-food program to help Iraq improve its economic condition.

Jan. 1997
Israeli and Palestinian authorities sign the Hebron accord, calling for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. However, the Israeli government angers the Palestinians by allowing the construction of more Jewish settlements in the West Bank, ostensibly to accomodate an influx of refugees from Russia. Later in the year, Hamas militants kill more than 20 Israeli civilians in suicide bombings.

Nov. 13. 1997
Iraq expels the American members of a UN weapons inspection team. Tensions rise during a 5-month standoff, and the US begins to build up its military presence in the Middle East.

1998-99
The Aden-Abyan Islamic Army, a militant Islamic group with the goal of turning Yemen into an Islamic state, kidnap several groups of Western tourists. Several tourists were killed during a botched rescue attempt.

1998
In August, Iraq puts a stop to all UN weapons inspections. The UN Security Council resolves that discussions about lifting sanctions on Iraq cannot begin until Iraq permits inspections to continue. On November 14, under threat of US and UK airstrikes, Iraq agrees to unconditionally cooperate with UN inspectors. However, on December 15, the United Nations arms inspector chief reports that Iraq is not living up to its agreement. In response, the United States and Great Britain begin airstrikes against strategic Iraqi military targets, seeking to gradually erode Iraq's military power.

May 1998
India conducts nuclear tests near the Pakistan border, and Pakistan follows up later that month with nuclear tests of its own. International sanctions are imposed on both countries.

Aug. 7, 1998
Car bombs explode outside US embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, killing 224 people. Osama bin Laden is named as the mastermind behind the bombings.

Aug. 20, 1998
US cruise missiles strike a terrorism training complex in Afghanistan believed to have been financed by Osama bin Laden. The US also asks the Taliban to deport bin Laden.

Sept. 1998
Iran deploys troops to its Afghanistan border after the Afghan ruling Taliban admits to killing eight Iranian diplomats and a journalist. Iran has supported radical terrorist actions against the Taliban, which belongs to a different Muslim sect (Sunni) than Iran (Shi'ite).

Oct. 1998
Israel/PLO negotiations resume regarding permanent Palestinian self-government in the Gaza Strip and West Bank. Although the two parties reach an agreement, the peace accord quickly begins to unravel.

1999
Saudi Arabia and the UAE dispute over relations with Iran. Saudi Arabia seeks to improve ties to the country, while UAE continues to see Iran as an enemy.

Israeli elections are held in May, and Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon becomes a dominating issue in the campaign. Ehud Barak unseats Netanyahu and becomes Israel's new prime minister. The following month, Israel bombs southern Lebanon. In September, Israel/PLO negotiations resume regarding permanent Palestinian self-government. In December, Israel and Syria resume talks, but the negotiations break down the following month when Syria demands the complete return of the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights.

Oct. 12, 1999
Gen. Pervez Musharraf leads a military coup over Pakistani prime minister Nawaz Sharif. The deposed Sharif is later exiled to Saudi Arabia.

Dec. 1999
The UN Security Council authorizes Iraq to export as much oil as it needs under the oil-for-food program to meet its humanitarian needs.

2000
The United Arab Emirates purchase 80 fighter jets and missiles from US defense company Lockheed Martin for nearly $8 billion, one of the biggest arms deals in history.

In February, Hezbollah forces attack Israeli targets, leading to Israeli retaliatory strikes on Lebanon. On May 24, Israel fully withdraws from Lebanon after a 22-year occupation. In September, high tensions and a visit by hardline opposition leader Ariel Sharon to a holy site lead to some of the worst violence in years for the region. Nearly 400 people, mostly Palestinians, are killed.

The United Nations arms inspections team for Iraq is reorganized when it is revealed that members of the original team also offered intelligence reports to the U.S. government. Despite the exclusion of Americans from the reorganized team, Iraq refuses to allow inspectors into the country.

Jan. 2000
Jordan admitted into the World Trade Organization.

Jan. 3, 2000
Authorities suspect this was the planned date (Muslim holy day of Ramadan) for a foiled multi-country terrorist attack masterminded by Osama bin Laden. Al Qaeda members arrested in Jordan in December 1999 admitted a plan to flatten the Radisson SAS Hotel in Amman. Later in the year, a suspect in October's USS Cole bombing told investigators that a terrorist cell in Aden also planned to attack the USS Sullivan on January 3. On Dec. 14, 1999, Ahmed Rassam, an Algerian, was arrested for possession of explosives as he tried to cross the border from Canada to Washington state; he may also have had a connection.

Feb. 2000
In a sweeping political change, reform candidates win a majority of seats in Iranian parliamentary elections, shifting control from political hard-liners. This more moderate group has helped president Mohammad Khatami smooth through more liberal reforms. However, in October, the Iranian judiciary shuts down pro-democracy and pro-reform publications, limiting the progressive movement.

Sept. 2000
In a videotaped statement, bin Laden threatens US interests in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere.

Oct. 12, 2000
A bombing kills 17 US sailors aboard the USS Cole in Yemen's port of Aden. Osama bin Laden is suspected to be the mastermind behind the attacks.

Nov. 2000
Kuwaiti security forces arrest 13 individuals and recover a large quantity of explosives and weapons. The suspected terrorist cell reportedly was planning to attack both Kuwaiti officials and US targets.

2001
Syria withdraws its troops from Beirut, but maintains a presence in the countryside.

Feb. 2001
Ariel Sharon handily defeats Barak in Israeli prime minister elections. Sharon, known for his hardline stances, military history and only cursory interest in the peace process, is greeted with muted enthusiasm from the West and outrage from the Arab states.

Mar. 2001
Despite global protests, the Taliban in Afghanistan orders the destruction of two enormous Buddhist statues dating from 400 AD., declaring them an affront to Islam.
