countryname=united arab emirates
&countryinfo=The Trucial States of the Persian Gulf coast granted the UK control of their defense and foreign affairs in 19th century treaties. In 1971, six of these states - Abu Zaby, 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah, Dubayy, and Umm al Qaywayn - merged to form the UAE. They were joined in 1972 by Ra's al Khaymah. The UAE's per capita GDP is not far below those of the leading West European nations. Its generosity with oil revenues and its moderate foreign policy stance have allowed it to play a vital role in the affairs of the region. 

source: CIA World Factbook 2000
&timeline=1745
Muhammed ibn'Abd al-Wahhab and his Wahhabi movement begin a holy war aimed at unifying the Arabian peninsula and "purifying" the region of other Islamic sects.

1818
The Ottomans and their Egyptian allies drive the Wahhabis out of the Arabian peninsula.

1853
During the 1800s, the UK grants local autonomy to the nine Trucial States of the Persian Gulf (later, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain).

1857
The UK takes control of the Indian subcontinent, including Pakistan.

1936
Oil discovered in Saudia Arabia, increasing the Middle East's worldwide importance. Commercial production begins during WWII.
	
Dec. 2, 1971
Six Trucial States (Abu Zaby, 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah, Dubayy and Umm al Qaywayn) merge to form the United Arab Emirates. The three other Trucials -- Qatar, Bahrain and Ra's al Khaymah -- do not join.

1972
The Trucial State of Ra's al Khaymah joins the United Arab Emirates.
	
1980s
Cheating by OPEC members, more competition from nonmembers and worldwide conservation efforts lead to lower oil prices, providing a serious economic blow for Middle Eastern oil-producing nations.
	
Sept. 27, 1996
The Taliban overthrows the Afghan government, but the country remains in flux, with various factions still fighting for control. By Fall 1998, the Taliban controls some 90 percent of the country. Even now, only three countries -- Pakistan, Saudia Arabia, UAE -- recognize the Taliban as the legitimate Afghan governing body.

1999
Saudi Arabia and the UAE dispute over relations with Iran. Saudi Arabia seeks to improve ties to the country, while UAE continues to see Iran as an enemy.
	
2000
The United Arab Emirates purchase 80 fighter jets and missiles from US defense company Lockheed Martin for nearly $8 billion, one of the biggest arms deals in history.
